---
tags: ["xll", "Excel", "xlw"]
categories: ["xll"]
date: 2014-12-19T00:00:00Z
published: true
title: Input/output arrays, vectors, matrices or ranges (XLW Part 4)
url: /xll/excel/2014/12/19/xlw-part4.html
---

In the [last post]({{< ref "2014-12-19-xlw-part3.md" >}}) I described how to
write simple functions using XLW. For the
introduction to XLW series take a look at the
[first post]({{< ref "2014-12-08-xlw-part1.md" >}}). Today I am going to show
how write functions that can input/ouput arrays, vectors, matrices or general
ranges.

The starting point will be the solution we set up in the
[previous post]({{< ref "2014-12-15-xlw-part2.md" >}}). If you don't have set it
up you can [download it](/downloads/xlw-part2.zip).

## 1. Numeric array input/output
The basic types for input or output arrays or matrices of numbers are:

* `MyMatrix`
* `MyArray`

The difference is that `MyMatrix` is two dimensional and `MyArray` is one
dimensional. `MyArray` is just a typecast to `std::vector<double>`.

Here is an example function that takes an array and produces the matrix equal
to outer product of the array with itself:

Add the following to `mylib.h`:
{{< highlight c "linenos=table" >}}
#include <xlw/MyContainers.h>

using namespace xlw;

MyMatrix // Outer product of array with itself
Outer1(const MyArray& a //array a
       );
{{< / highlight >}}

Add the following to `mylib.cpp`:
{{< highlight c "linenos=table" >}}
MyMatrix Outer1(const MyArray& a)
{
  MyMatrix res(a.size(),a.size());
  for(size_t i = 0; i < a.size(); ++i)
  {
    for(size_t j = 0; j < a.size(); ++j)
    {
      res[i][j] = a[i]*a[j];
    }
  }

  return res;
}
{{< / highlight >}}

### `MyArray` and `MyMatrix` Gotchas:

* XLW does not flatten input, so if you try to supply two dimensional
  cell range for `MyArray` argument, the call to that function will fail. Only
  one dimensional column or row range can work for `MyArray`.
* Although both horizontal and vertical cell ranges can be supplied as values
  for `MyArray`, the output `MyArray` is always a column range. So if you need
  to output horizontal one-dimensional array use `MyMatrix` with one row.
* If a user tries to supply a range with data incompatible with MyMatrix or
  MyArray, the function does not run and returns with the message that it failed
  to convert input range.
* The input array types should be defined const and passed by referenced
  (i.e. `const MyArray&`).
* **Debug note**: If during debug of your code the debugger breaks with a
  message `User breakpoint called from code at ...` and Assembly is shown,
  it means that somewhere in the code the MyMatrix or MyArray was written beyond
  defined bounds. I.e. the following code would produce such an error:

{{< highlight c "linenos=table" >}}
MyArray f()
{
  MyArray a(5);
  a[5] = 1.; // maximum index for a is 4
  return a;
}
{{< / highlight >}}

  The error is signaled at line 5 (when the function returns), rather than at
  line 4 (when *out of range* assignment takes place) - this makes finding this
  bug tricky.

## 2. Input/output matrices of mixed types
`CellMatrix` or `XlfOper` can be used to input or output matrices of mixed
types. `XlfOper` is preferable since it does not need to copy data into
temporary memory, which is especially important for big ranges.

`XlfOper` has the following methods which allow querying data directly from
Excel:

* **Inspectors**:
  * `IsMissing()` - used by Excel to flag a parameter that hasn't been supplied
  * `IsError()` - is the data an error?
  * `IsRef()` - is the data a reference?
  * `IsSRef()` - is the data a sheet reference?
  * `IsNumber()` - is the data a number?
  * `IsString()` - is the data a string?
  * `IsNil()` - is the data an empty cell?
  * `IsBool()` - is the data a boolean?
  * `IsInt()` - is the data an integer?
  * `IsMulti()` - is the data a matrix?. If multi can use the following methods:
    * `rows()` - number of rows in the matrix
    * `columns()` - number of columns in the matrix
    * `(i, j)` - can use bracket notation to set/retrieve values from the matrix
* **Conversions**:
  * `AsDouble()` to `double`
  * `AsRef()` to `XlfRef`
  * `AsShort()` to `short`
  * `AsBool()` to `bool`
  * `AsInt()` to `int`
  * `AsULong()` to `unsigned long`
  * `AsString()` to `char*`
  * `AsWstring()` to `std::wstring`
  * `AsDoubleVector()` to `std::vector<double>`
  * `AsArray()` to `MyArray`
  * `AsMatrix()` to `MyMatrix`
  * `AsCellMatrix()` to `CellMatrix`

### Example

Add the following to `mylib.h`:
{{< highlight c "linenos=table" >}}
XlfOper //Squares all numbers and sets all other cells to \"-\"
SquareNumbers(XlfOper& input //input range
  );
{{< / highlight >}}

**Note:** Input `XlfOper&` argument should not be `const`, because otherwise
you won't be able to access its elements with `(i, j)` notation.

Add the following to `mylib.cpp`
{{< highlight c "linenos=table" >}}
XlfOper SquareNumbers(XlfOper& input)
{
  if( !input.IsMulti() )
  {
    XlfOper res;
    if (input.IsNumber())
    {
      const double x = input.AsDouble();
      res = x * x;
    }
    else
    {
      res = "-";
    }
    return res;
  }

  XlfOper res(input.rows(), input.columns());
  for (size_t i = 0; i < res.rows(); ++i)
  {
    for (size_t j = 0; j < res.columns(); ++j)
    {
      if(input(i,j).IsNumber())
      {
        const double x = input(i, j).AsDouble();
        res(i, j) = x*x;
      }
      else
      {
        res(i, j) = "-";
      }
    }
  }
  return res;
}
{{< / highlight >}}

Here is another example how you can populate output range:
{{< highlight c "linenos=table" >}}
XlfOper ret(3, 2);
ret(0, 0) = "abc";
ret(0, 1) = (short)42;
ret(1, 0) = 1.23;
ret(1, 1) = XlfOper::Error(xlerrValue);
ret(2, 0) = true;
{{< / highlight >}}

**Update 08/19/2016 Gotcha**
Sometimes, when  you use two dimensional `XlfOper` as a return from your 
function, instead of your output you see `#N\A` in Excel cells. This happens 
when one or more of the cells of `XlfOper` are left not initialized.
For instance if in the example above you remove the second line 
(`ret(0, 0) = "abc";`) the output in Excel will contain `#N\A` in every cell 
(not just in the first one).

## 3. Happy Coding!

If you want to see the code described in this post in action you can
[download updated `mylib` library](/downloads/xlw-part3-4.zip).
