---
layout: post
title: "Building Excel Add-ins (XLW Part 1)"
date: "2014-12-08 22:11"
categories: "xll Excel"
published: true
---

This is a first post from a series devoted to building xll add-ins for Excel.

Add-ins are used to extend Excel functionality. It is possible to extend Excel
using VBA in the same spreadsheet. However this way VBA code is tightly coupled
with the spreadsheet, which makes it difficult to keep track of code
versions or update code for all copies of a spreadsheet.

Users often make copies of spreadsheets because they want to modify something
but want to keep original around. Unfortunately it is never clear what they
modify - it can be data, code or both. As a result often there are many slightly
different spreadsheets floating around. In this scenario updating your code
to fix a bug or add an enhancement if almost impossible.

Add-ins let us separate code from spreadsheet data. This allows us to resolve
all problems that we encounter when using spreadsheets with embedded code.

## Ways to build an add-in for Excel

There are many ways to build add-ins. Here is a list of of the ways that I
have tried (I prefer open source or at least free tools):

* **VBA**
  * **Pros**: You just need Excel and don't need to install any other tool - it
    includes VBE (Visual Basic Editor).
    VBE is a decent development environment with integrated debugger.
  * **Cons**: VBA is often quite slow. VBE is not very customizable. The code
    lives inside add-in, which prevents regular use of source control with it.
    Source code is available to any user (it is trivial to remove password
    protection if you set up one).
* **[Excel-DNA](http://exceldna.codeplex.com)**
  * **Pros**: Mature and free environment to develop add-ins using C#. It has
    very good documentation and active support forum.
  * **Cons**: C# is not available on all platforms (so if your code needs to run
    from Excel as well as on a server this might be an obstacle). Even though
    it is possible to call unmanaged dll's from C# setting up development and
    debugging process is challenging.
* **[XLW](http://xlw.sourceforge.net)**
  * **Pros**: Thin wrapper for Excel C API - easy to setup, use, debug. Very
    fast. Can be used with C++, C# or VB.NET
  * **Cons**: The documentation is not well maintained and not very detailed.

If you are a fan of C# take a close look at Excel-DNA. If you prefer using C/C++
XLW is a better alternative. For my projects I prefer to use C/C++. I create
simple C-type dll or static library with core functions. The library can be used
in any other environment (Matlab, Mathematica, VBA, etc.). Then I use XLW
wrapper to interface the functions with Excel.

## Topics

In this series of posts I plan to cover the following topics:

* [Setting up a project with XLW]({% post_url 2014-12-15-xlw-part2 %})
* [Writing simple functions callable from Excel]({% post_url 2014-12-19-xlw-part3 %})
* [Handling and reporting errors]({% post_url 2014-12-19-xlw-part3 %}#handling-errors)
* [Input/output arrays, vectors, matrices or ranges]({% post_url 2014-12-19-xlw-part4 %})
* [Let user interrupt long calculations]({% post_url 2015-01-21-xlw-part5 %}#abort-function-when-a-user-presses-esc)
* [Timing functions]({% post_url 2015-01-21-xlw-part5 %}#timing-functions)
* Logging.
* Adding help to your add-in.
* Deployment strategies.
* Writing macros.

As I go over these topics I will share the best practices that I converged to
over the years of using XLW to write add-ins.